2.   Proposed approach  In this paper, we propose a new architecture for multimodal emotion recognition. Our model uses both audio and text infor- mation to obtain better classification performance. The model architecture is shown in Figure 1.   The proposed architec- ture consists of 2 streams, audio encoder (ENC1) and text en- coder(ENC2) as shown in the figure. The audio encoder con- sists of a series of 1D convolutions followed by a Bi-LSTM layer to extract high-level feature representations from the raw audio waveform. Similarly, the text encoder (ENC2) takes se- quence of Glove embeddings [20] for every sentences and feeds them a single 1D convolutional layer followed by a Bi-LSTM layer to obtain high-level semantic representations. These two feature sequences are fed into a cross-modal attention module in the audio encoder and text encoder, as shown in Figure 1. The cross-modal attention module in the audio encoder stream (CMA-1) takes the output from Bi-LSTM of the audio encoder as query vectors and output from the Bi-LSTM of the text en- coder as key and value vectors and applies multi-head scaled dot product attetion. Similarly, The cross-modal attention mod- ule in the text encoder stream (CMA-2) takes the output from Bi-LSTM of the text encoder as query vectors and output from Bi-LSTM of the audio encoder as key and value vectors and ap- plies multi-head scaled dot product attention. This helps in find- ing the interactive information between audio and text feature sequences. The CMA-1 and CMA-2 helps in selecting features which more relevant and helpful for emotion recognition. We finally pool the features from both CMA-1 and CMA-2 using statistics pooling layer. These pooled features are concatenated and fed to the softmax layer to predict the emotion label. We explain these blocks in detail in the following section.  2.1. Audio encoder  The audio encoder processes audio data in order to extract fea- tures that are useful for better emotion classification. The audio encoder consist of three 1D convolutional layers followed by a single Bi-LSTM layer.   The audio encoder takes raw wave- form as input and applies sequence of 1D convolution opera- tions to extract meaningful features from the raw audio. Each convolutional block consist of a convolution operation followed by Batch normalization,Relu and max pooling operation as de- scribed in Figure 1. Each convolutional layer has its own ker- nel size and filters. we have [1x3,1x5,1x7] filter size for   Conv- 1 ,   Conv-2   and   Conv-3   layer respectively.   Similarly, we have [64,100,100] filters for   Conv-1 ,   Conv-2   and   Conv-3   layer re- spectively. Since convolutional layer does not capture tempo- ral information, we use Bi-LSTM right after convolution. Let  X n   = [ x 1 , x 2 ..x n , ...x N   ]   be raw audio sequence with N samples.  F   A   =   Convolution ( X n )   (1) Where,   Convolution   is a sequence of 3 1D convolutional layers applied to the raw waveform   X n   as shown in Figure 1.   After convolution, we obtain a feature sequence   F   A   = [ f 1 , f 2 .....f T   ]   of length T (T << N). Typically after the convo- lution operation,   F   A   can be looked as a feature matrix whose x-axis is a time dimension, and the y-axis is a feature dimen- sion. The feature dimension is the same as the number of filters in the last convolutional layer. In our case, the feature dimen- sion is 100, as the number of filters in the last convolutional layer is 100. Since convolution can’t capture temporal informa- tion, we use Bi-LSTM to process the feature vectors from the convolutional block.  H A   =   Bi-LSTM ( F   A )   (2) Where   Bi-LSTM   represents a single bidirectional LSTM layer whose hidden dimension is 100.   H A   = [ h 1 , h 2 .....h T   ]  represents the output sequence from the Bi-LSTM layer.  2.2. Text encoder  The text encoder model processes sequence of word embed- dings extracted using the Glove word embedding model [20]. The text encoder(ENC2) consists of a single 1D convolutional layer followed by a single Bi-LSTM layer. Text encoder takes sequence of N-word embeddings   W   T   = [ w 1 , w 2 .....w N   ]   as input to 1D convolutional layer, where   w i   is a 300 dimensional Glove word embedding for the   i th   word.   We set N to be 50 in our experiments. The convolutional layer acts as a projection layer where it projects the word embedding dimension from 300 to 100 and does not alter the time dimension.  F   T   =   Convolution ( W   T   )   (3) Where   F   A   = [ f 1 , f 2 .....f N   ]   is a feature sequence after convolution operation. It can be noted that   W   T   and   F   T   has the same number of frames due to kernel size one during con- volution operation. After convolutional layer, the text encoder passes feature sequence   F   T   to Bi-LSTM to capture high-level semantic and syntactic information.  H T   =   Bi-LSTM ( F   T   )   (4) Where   Bi-LSTM   represents a single bidirectional LSTM layer whose hidden dimension is 100.   H T   = [ h 1 , h 2 .....h N   ]  represents the output sequence from the Bi-LSTM layer.  2.3. Cross modal attention  Attention is a very well known concept in deep learning, es- pecially for temporal sequences. Attention models have shown state of the art results in various fields like, speech recognition,  4244

Figure 2:   Cross modal attention. CMA-1 (left) represents cross modal attention from audio to text and CMA-2(right) represents cross modal attention from text to audio  speaker identification, language identification so and on. Vari- ous attention models are invented over the past, which includes dot product attention, locality-sensitive attention, additive atten- tion, so on. In our case, we use a special type of attention called multi-head scaled dot product attention [22].   The scaled dot product attention is the core building block of cross-modal at- tention. The scaled dot product attention in multi-head settings are described in [22]. A detailed Cross-modal attention block is shown in Figure 2. The cross-modal attention consists of Multi-head attention layers.   The multi-head attention (MHA) layers consists of multi-head scaled dot product attention, matrix multiply, and position-wise feed-forward layer, as shown in Figure 2.   The MHA block consists of M linear layers for query Key and Value matrices, where M is the number of heads in the multi-head attention. The MHA takes audio features and text features as input and applies attention logic to find the interactive infor- mation between the modalities. The inputs to the cross-modal attention blocks are query key and values, as shown in Figure 2. The cross-modal attention block takes audio feature or text fea- tures from Bi-LSTM and applies linear transform to create   Q i ,  K i   and   V i   using   i th   linear transform where,   i   = [1 ,   2 .....M   ]  and M is the total number of attention heads. The   Q i ,   K i   and  V i   are fed into scaled dot product attention layer followed by matrix multiplication between the value matrix and attention weights.   The scaled dot product attention   A i   for   i th   head is defined as follows.  A i   =   Softmax (   Q i K i  d q  ) V i   (5) Where,   d q   is the dimension of the query vector. We com- bine the attention output from all the heads using simple con- catenation and feed them into the feed-forward layer.  A   =   Concat ( A 1 , A 2 , A 3 ...A i .....A M   ) W 0   (6) In our case, we have 2 cross-modal attention modules CMA-1 and CMA-2.   The CMA-1 is responsible for finding interactive information from audio to text, and CMA-2 is re- sponsible for computing the interactive information from text to audio. In the case of CMA-1, we consider   H A   as a query matrix and   H T   as the key and value matrix. Similarly, in the case of CMA-2, we consider   H T   as a query matrix and   H A  as the key and value matrix.   This process makes sure the at- tention is applied in both directions to capture interactive fea- tures which are helpful for better emotion classification.   We use layer normalization[20] before linear transformation during attention computation, which helps in faster convergence dur- ing training. Both CMA-1 and CMA-2 consists of 2 multi-head attention (MHA) blocks in our architecture. The audio feature matrix   H A   consists of T vectors, each of dimension 100 and text feature   H T   consist of N vectors of dimension 100.  2.4. Statistics pooling  The statistics pooling layer computes the mean and standard deviation across time in a feature sequence. Statistics pooling helps in pooling the features across time to obtain a single fea- ture representation for classification.   The mean and standard deviation are concatenated to obtain the second-order statistics of the feature sequence from CMA-1 or CMA-2.   We finally concatenate second-order statistics from CMA-1 and CMA-2 for further classification.  P   A   =   Concat ( mean ( A a ) ,   std ( A a ))   (7)  P   T   =   Concat ( mean ( A t ) ,   std ( A t ))   (8) Where,   A a ,   A t   are the outputs from CMA-1 and CMA-2 respectively.   P   A   is a pooled feature vector from   A a   and   P   T   is a pooled feature vector from   A t   . Both   P   T   and   P   T   are having same dimension.